---
template: post
title: Sunday 5 Part 4
slug: sunday-5-part-4
draft: false
date: 2021-04-25T17:04:13.249Z
description: |+
  The 3rd chapter in Stanley Story series

submission: STANLEY SUNDAYS
author: Stanley Coutinho
---
**The Morning After**

Part III

Rafique:

Rafique woke up in his first-floor room at the International Students’ Hostel, with his characteristic look of confusion. His clothes lay in a crumpled heap on the lone chair in the room. He had jumped into bed last night in his birthday suit as usual, and was now wide awake. The dusty Asokas standing along the compound wall did little to shield his room from the harsh 9 o’clock rays of the sun streaming through his window. He shrugged into his dressing gown and went to draw the skimpy curtains provided by the hostel, and the first thing he sighted outside was the hostel stray (whom his hostel-mates had rather curiously named ‘maf-ker’) locked with a black bitch of the neighbourhood. With a disgust that he couldn’t quite justify to himself, he turned towards the bathroom – wishing he had the luxury of the bath tub where he could relax half the morning. But this was a students’ hostel in *India*, where he had come to earn a degree in law while catching up on his roots. His brief encounter with officialdom in Delhi was enough for a lifetime of “Indian experience”. It was about time for him also to move on. He would move shortly to Johannesburg. It was time to erase those memories. If possible.

Back in 1975, Mario and he would have frequent exchanges: he on South Africa and Mario on Indian history and politics. Nelson Mandela was in prison and apartheid was at its worst; Mario, having opted for History at the UPSC examinations, considered himself an expert of sorts on the subject. And as students of law, they had a field day with their generally pointless constitutional discussions… All that would end now. In any case, the constitution didn’t have much of a meaning for him after his visit to New Delhi …

…..

*Saturday, The 29th of June, 2019.*





*When Pappu arrived, panting and perspiring, Mario stood up and grappled him in a tight hug. So much had happened since that last night at the Pier so many decades ago. He clung on to Pappu as if he were trying to hold onto, and recreating, that past which had suddenly appeared before him. His eyes were clouded as he sat down, flushed with his spontaneous and unexpected burst of emotion. His meeting with Rafique, earlier, had been less effusive, more self-conscious. Pappu and Rafique also hugged – uncomfortably. A spot of tense silence followed as they sat down and busied themselves shifting in their chairs, fidgeting with them, adjusting the distances between their protruding stomach-lines and the table …*



*… and for nothing better to start the conversation with, Mario said: “We were talking about Modi’s second coming. Would you like some beer?” Pappu was now a full-fledged journalist working for a business magazine, (the bookshop was long forgotten) and could hold forth about the country and its ease-of-doing-business, and the general perception about the socio-political developments; he also knew when to keep his mouth shut.*



*“No,” he said, “I’d rather have a Glenfiddich, neat. Small, to start with!”*



*Mario marvelled at the guy’s cool sophistication. A single malt. Coming out of the mess in Sindhi Camp in Chembur, he used to be a fan of ‘LP’ those days when it was available at Rs.7.50 a bottle. And Mario couldn’t afford even that.*



*“How much of the discussion is linked with your both being from minority communities? I hope you don’t mind me being so blunt!” The question was softened by a smile that reminded Mario of the old days. But his eyes were serious as he waited for them to answer.*



*“Not at all”, said Mario, laughing a trifle forcedly. “Actually, I was quoting Advani’s dire warning while Rafique was saying that we need not bother about his…”*



*“Yes, but deep down, what are your fears based on?”*



*“Fears?” Mario asked with an uncertain smile. Rafique’s eyes shifted from one face to the other.*



*“You see, Mario, most people talk about the present government either out of blind faith in this grand persona that has emerged literally from nowhere, or out of some unexpressed fears.”*



*Mario looked at him, silently, beer in hand. Pappu continued: “Let me answer for you. ‘Majoritarianism’ for instance. A word I am sure you have used quite often in your private discussions. An interesting word, isn’t it? It’s been bandied about quite a bit these past few years. To most people it implies that the minorities will be crushed or deported, or … worse. They wonder what is in store for them as the huge mandate unfolds over the next five years.*



*“So, as I was saying, we need to take personal factors out of the discussion. I’ll tell you what happened just the other day. I was speaking to a friend about the origin of the words, ‘India’ and ‘Hindu’. You know, we have discussed this earlier (forty years ago?)” he said, looking towards Mario, “how the words came down from the Greek, Latin, English; the concept of India as one large, rich kingdom; he heard me out but was quite agitated at the end, and snapped: ‘We **had** a unifying factor, the Sanatan Dharma’, he said. I tried to tell him that a common religion or culture does not make a nation; that the concept of India as a separate kingdom, huge and overflowing with wealth, was born in the European imagination, fired by tales of explorers’…”*



*“You should have asked him how Columbus found “India” across the Atlantic!” quipped Mario.*



*“Finally, I had to tell him that such discussions can be held only on facts … not if you get emotional about it. He forgot that I am also a Hindu!”*



*Rafique smiled indulgently at the conversation that was picking up. “So, you see”, continued Pappu, “if your being a Muslim or a Christian is an underlying factor in the discussion, it is difficult to carry on.”*



*“Oh, we weren’t on an emotional plane at all”, said Mario at the same time as Rafique hastened to agree that emotions can rarely be kept apart … and the three had a good laugh, Pappu, good-humouredly pointing his extended palms towards both of them, as if to say: Need I say more? But Mario wasn’t quite sure because his stint as a bureaucrat had taught him to suppress his “minority” feelings – although uneducated and uninformed remarks about religions, missionary activity and “foreign” connections and/or loyalties were part of the culture that he had endured.*



*“Anyway”, said Pappu, “I have a slightly different notion about these fears. Please hold that concept of majoritarianism at the back of your mind, right? We have all experienced the earlier emergency, and you are both lawyers. With your knowledge of the Constitution and our, essentially peripheral experience of the emergency, I think we believe that such conditions can come up again. But only as the result of a constitutional exercise, right? Mrs. Gandhi openly declared the emergency; something that, looking back now, we should thank her for that openness…’*



*“Hey…” Mario expectedly protested but Pappu, his left hand raised in a Buddha-like gesture, potato wafer between his thumb and fore-finger, requesting that he be heard out. “Openness! That’s the key word.” We need not,” he continued, “concern ourselves at this point over the circumstances that pushed her into it. But, can we, for the sake of the argument, imagine the so-called emergency conditions without a formal declaration?”*