---
template: post
title: Sunday 5-III
slug: sunday-5-iii
draft: false
date: 2021-03-15T03:35:18.910Z
description: Stanley Sundays- Story series, part 3
submission: STANLEY SUNDAYS
author: Stanley Coutinho
---
**The Morning After**

Part II

Mario:

Mario woke up at the Bombay Port Trust quarters allotted to his father in Wadala. His first sensation was of a severe headache, a condition arising out of exposure to the nightly dew at the Pier more than the readily available, but totally unacceptable, explanation of a hangover. It was quite bright when he opened his eyes, and for the millionth time, decided that he would never have a house with the bedroom facing the East. For the present, however, on the rexine-bound sofa-cum-bed in the drawing-cum-living room, he drew the coarse Sholapur Textiles sheet over his head to keep the glare out.

The room, though, had been open to everyone in the house by 6.30 am. Dad came in with his cup of tea and the newspaper – preceded by the acrid smell of the *Charminar*. He heard the soft creak as his father lowered himself gently on to the chair. The rustling of the paper and the tinkling of the cup meeting the saucer every few seconds continued for a few minutes. First the editorials, then the sports page cursorily, and then the front page. Rustle, rustle, rustle. Mario then heard the paper drop softly onto the wooden box of old newspapers and magazines which served as a side-table, followed by the soft tinkling of the cup and saucer as Dad shuffled out of the room.

Mario’s younger brother who worked for Carbide Chemicals, in Chembur, was next to appear, sniffing heavily as he entered the room; was he getting the smell of whisky? Mario hoped it was the *Charminar*. He also had an elder brother also, on whom the parents had spent more than their life-savings getting him through his MBA; the chap then joined some obscure company in Bombay and, since he was getting his own salary, expected a rise in the quality and quantity of food for himself that was far beyond the levels the family was accustomed to, or could afford, even with that additional salary input. Then suddenly, after a year, frustrated with the kind of work he was doing, he decided to resign and to appear for the UPSC exams. The house was littered with books and old question papers; there were hours of study when no one was allowed to even tip-toe past him. And, the heavens be praised, he got through and was now away on training. Mario would spend his spare time outside the house, working on the college magazine he edited. And the girls… but more about that later.

Looking back sometimes, he couldn’t fathom how his father with his limited income could have brought up the three of them, right through college. Of course, his mother earned something as a teacher in the local convent, and there was income from private tuitions, something that her husband was never allowed to forget. She also drummed into the ears of anyone who would listen, that back home in Goa, we have a big house – “this whole flat is smaller than our main hall”…. and the neighbours smiled indulgently, looking at the folding chairs, the sofa-cum-bed and the make-shift dining table in the “drawing room”; her harried look as she walked two kilometres to school every day, rain or shine, and the private tuitions she gave to several children after school-hours – hardly supported her stories of a mansion back home. The fact that all those hardships were to ensure that her children were given a “proper education”, was never understood by these neighbours whose ambitions seldom went beyond getting their sons employed in the Port Trust. And hence, for Mario, the college fees and the books and the clothes he wore came out of money spent with utmost sense of guilt.

The dragging of rubber slippers along the floor indicated that the maid-servant had come in, the sign for him to get out of bed. He picked up the bed covers, folded them neatly, and placed them in the appointed slot in the adjacent bedroom, by which time the maid had folded the bed into a sofa. He went out to the little balcony for some fresh air. The wide-open expanse beyond the quarters gave him a feeling of space, which was a relief while living in the congested, one-bedroom apartment; he could see the Trombay hill on the distant horizon, befogged with the fumes spewed out by the RCF in Chembur; one multi-storeyed building nearby, stuck out like a vulgar symbol amidst the middling structures around it. There was a feeling of time standing still here, and he hardly noticed the sound of the Harbour-Line locals that trundled past every few minutes. All these years, as they had moved at a painful pace from even smaller quarters to the present one, there had been no time to enjoy the scenery ... there were exams to be passed, class ranks to be maintained, and a career to be made. Even during the half-hour walk each way to the college and back, through the peaceful and romantic Five Gardens, he watched young boys and girls going in for cuddles and more …, he remained focussed on the one single aim: get a good job; get out of the house!

For the present, his headache seemed to have subsided and he felt a little relaxed though the nausea had not quite dissipated. His mother came around and peeped through the curtain and tiptoed back to wherever she had to go. She had probably come to see if he was up an about, in spite of the late night. He didn’t remember his mother showing any more interest than this throughout his childhood – her life was complete when her eldest was born. Her third son was a victim of frequent bouts of fever that no doctor could explain; the illness disappeared by the time he was twelve years old, as mysteriously as it had begun. But between the doting on the first and worrying over the second, Mario was more or less left to grow on his own – often ignored, more often forgotten. The emotional vacuum in his early childhood was filled by the live-in maid they had during those years, a dedicated, hardworking girl, who slept in the stuffy kitchen, and was as maternal as she could be (she was all of 20 by the time she left them). Mario was twelve by then, and alone.

And, as so many thousand times before, caught between his quest for an emotional harbour and his spoonerism-ridden reticence in the presence of girls (aka pathetic shyness), he thought: *Will I ever get the courage to go and speak to Pushpa?* Maybe, after I get my appointment letter, I will.

*.......*

Dominic:

Sleeping comfortably in his hundred-year-old, first-floor house on Chapel Road in Bandra, Dominic was awakened by the sound of the lady downstairs blowing the conch as she went about her morning *puja*. The ground floor had been let out by his parents to a Bengali family recently. He knew that it was irreverent to find the sound irritating but whoever had started that practice had not had excessive scotch down his throat the previous night.

Dominic knew that by the time he was out of his large four-poster bed, his father (a PhD in Microbiology) would be at Haffkine’s Institute in Parel, and his mother would be at St. Stanislaus where she taught Maths in the High School. With only one sister, he had had a fairly comfortable childhood, a loving family with an atmosphere for study and nurturing of personal ambitions. Dad was generally late coming home as he would walk up to Sewri Station, take the time-honoured Harbour Line up to Bandra Railway Station, and then walk up the approximate kilometre to the house. His characteristic, staccato, knock of the door would be delayed if he happened to meet any of the multitude of his friends along Chapel Road (which was not unusual). Sunday mornings, though, were almost regimented: the 8 a.m. Mass, regardless of the weather; breakfast together at the dining table; gathering in the drawing room where the four of them shared their experiences of the past week or just sat together reading various magazines and books, while Mum supervised the cooking. Then it was lunch where they said the Grace together with a resounding “Amen!” The evenings would be spent on the piano (both his parents played the instrument well) with songs that ranged from old westerns (“Covered Wagon Lullaby” for one) and Konkani *mandos* and *dulpods ­*– until dinner time*.* The news on All India Radio would round up the day for everyone except for their late-night reading. He would miss all that. He had received an appointment letter from the State Bank of India posting him to Bhandara – a place that neither he, nor any of his friends, had ever heard of. He had been “advised” to take the Bombay-Howrah Mail and get off at a station called Bhandara Road soon after Nagpur railway station. He would be picked up from there. He was due to report in a week and wasn’t quite sure what kind of a status an officer in State Bank enjoys. And what would the climate in Bhandara be like, very hot or very cold or both?

He switched the old Murphy radio on for the ever-effusive announcers from the Sri Lanka Broadcasting Corporation and found that the mysterious Angelina from Jabalpur had her usual request that morning. He tromped towards the bathroom to the tune of Bobby Bare’s *Singin’ In The Kitchen*; by the time he had brushed his teeth and was out of the bathroom, the radio was playing Mary Hopkins’ *Those Were The Days, My Friend*. Sadly, he thought, “those days” were about to end now. Then, wondering whether there would be any Christian community in Bhandara, he went about making his list of items to be packed on his first stay away from home.

......

Paul:

It was the siren that woke Paul up at 4 o’clock in the morning, in the police quarters in Borivli. An alertness, born out of his father’s reaction to such sounds from early childhood, made him jump out of his bed though his head was on a slow-spin mode. By the time he reached the balcony, the black maria had disappeared down Market Road, towards the Railway Station leaving the harsh ribbon of sound in its wake. From the other bedroom, he heard his father’s stage-whispered enquiry: wazza matter? Paul quietly slipped back into his bed and lay awake playing out what Farida and Harry may be doing at this hour, constantly disturbed by the thought of having to leave Bombay on his first posting. He had to report to the Nagpur office of the Reserve Bank of India in a week but had not yet made up his mind about going. His father had already told a million people that my Paul is now an officer in the Reserve Bank.

This was in spite of the fact that he had made it very clear that he wasn’t happy about going anywhere out of Bombay. This was where he had grown up, where he felt secure and confident; his father being a police officer added to that backdrop of emotional anchoring. No one could bully him, at least. His kindergarten days with the busty middle-aged Catholic lady who ran the classes in her own house nearby, still glowed like a long-forgotten field of sunflowers. She had five children of her own ... wonder where they are now. He remembered how they accommodated him as he waited for some disgruntled constable to come and pick him, since his mother, Miriam, worked in a Bank in Bandra while Dad used to be “on duty” most of the time. Dad had joined the Police as an Assistant Sub-Inspector and had remained at that rank for as long as he could remember.

One morning, when Paul was about nine years old, the newspapers highlighted a series of unexplained deaths of pavement dwellers. All of them (there were nineteen by the time the press got wind of it) had been bludgeoned to death with a heavy stone. Each time the boulder was left neatly at the side of the victim, as a silent challenge to the investigators. The reaction in Bombay ranged from panic to snooty disinterest. The police, however, were at their edgiest. Nineteen murders in a span of fifteen days, and the press had to get onto it before they could make any progress in the investigation. It was an unknown person with no apparent motive, at large in a city, teeming with a floating population of millions of suspicious characters.

“In the bank everybody is asking …” Miriam had mumbled through the beef chilly-fry.

“About?” Asked Dad, more gruffly than he perhaps intended.

“About this chap. The night-time killer. Your husband is a police, they’re saying …… and ... and you must be knowing something.”

“Yes, Daddy,” Paul piped in, “tell me ‘ow you will catch ‘im!”

“You know he’s a dangerous fellow? Killing people like that? They think it’s a joke? that I can just go and catch him?” ASI Pinto was on his third peg of XXX Rum.

Mum said, “I didn’t ask you about catching him, dear. Paulie did. My friends just want to know ….”

“Tell them to mind their own business. Police work is not like a bank …”

“You don’t have to get upset, dear. People are just curious…”. Little Paul was left looking from his mother to his father and back.

Post dinner, as usual, the All India Radio news was switched on at 9. The major item of news that day was that an arrest has been made in connection with the serial murders in Bombay. Dad looked crestfallen. Without a word, he went off to sleep. When he woke up the next morning he appeared to be totally deflated. Paul couldn’t understand this change in his Dad. Miriam let it pass. ASI Pinto knew that he would spend the rest of his career in relative obscurity. Borivli, beyond the city limits of Bombay, contributed to the obscurity: once the serial killer was apprehended, it relaxed into the quiet settlement that it had always been. The Western Railway local trains served the residents well and people were happy commuting southwards for their daily bread and returning to the quiet of their homes when the day was done.

Paul, in the meantime, was admitted to the old Franciscan school on the mount, not far from the National Park and the caves of the 4th Century BCE. They were a major attraction for schools from all parts of Bombay, mostly as picnic spots. Paul had heard his classmates talk about a mysterious tunnel in the Park running all the way to Kalyan in the east. It is believed, he found out later, that there were little harbours that accommodated ancient Greek and Mesopotamian ships, on the estuary of River Ulhas, long before Gerald Aungier could envision the large natural harbour in the cluster of islands which came to be known as “Bombay”.

Paul moved to the National College and later to the Law College. And now there was Nagpur beckoning.